.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Kyle R. Rose
.TH EMBOOT\-PREPARE 8 "2026-06-18" "efi-measured-boot" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
emboot\-prepare \- check system readiness for efi-measured-boot and automate safe preparation steps
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emboot\-prepare
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B emboot\-prepare
is an interactive readiness wizard that should be run before
.BR emboot\-setup (8).
It checks the prerequisites for
.B efi-measured-boot
and, where safe to do so, offers to perform automated fixups.  Risky
steps (partition layout changes, encryption setup) are explained with
instructions but not performed automatically.
.PP
All output goes to standard error.  The program exits with status 0 if there
are no blocking issues, or 1 if one or more blocking issues remain unresolved.
.PP
Must be run as root (e.g. via
.BR sudo ).
.SH CHECKS
The following checks are performed in order.  Each is reported as
.BR [PASS] ,
.BR [FAIL] ,
.BR [WARN] ,
or
.BR [SKIP] .
Failures marked
.B [FAIL]
are blocking; the system cannot be set up until they are resolved.
Warnings are non-blocking but recommended to address.
.TP
.B root
The process must run as the root user.
.TP
.B arch
The host architecture must be
.BR x86_64 .
.TP
.B UEFI mode
The system must be booted in UEFI mode (not CSM/legacy BIOS).
Detected via the presence of
.IR /sys/firmware/efi .
.TP
.B GPT partition table
The boot disk's partition table must be GPT.  MBR partition tables do not
support the EFI System Partition type required by UEFI firmware.
.TP
.B GRUB
.B grub\-efi\-amd64
must be installed.  If
.B grub\-pc
(legacy BIOS GRUB) is found instead, an automated fixup is offered (see
.B AUTOMATED FIXUPS
below).
.TP
.B GRUB_ENABLE_CRYPTODISK
If
.B grub\-efi\-amd64
is installed,
.B /etc/default/grub
is checked for
.B GRUB_ENABLE_CRYPTODISK=y
(needed for GRUB to unlock the LUKS root during a recovery boot).  An
automated fixup is offered if it is missing.
.TP
.B ESP
The EFI System Partition must be mounted at
.IR /boot/efi .
The partition must be at least 500\ MiB (required to store two kernel
blobs); a warning is issued if it is under 1\ GiB.
.TP
.B /boot on root
.I /boot
must reside on the root filesystem, not on a separate partition.  The
initramfs is built into the EFI blob; a separate
.I /boot
partition is unnecessary and unsupported.
.TP
.B LUKS2
The root device must be backed by a dm-crypt device with a LUKS2 header,
reachable via
.IR /etc/crypttab .
Only a single LUKS layer in the device ancestry is supported.  At least one
keyslot must use the PBKDF2 key derivation function (required for GRUB
recovery boot, since GRUB 2.12 does not support Argon2).
.TP
.B TPM 2.0
A TPM 2.0 chip must be present and accessible.  Detected by running
.BR tpm2_pcrread (1).
.SH AUTOMATED FIXUPS
After all checks have run,
.B emboot\-prepare
offers to perform the following fixups (each requires interactive confirmation):
.TP
.B Install grub\-efi\-amd64
If
.B grub\-pc
is installed and
.B grub\-efi\-amd64
is not, offers to install
.B grub\-efi\-amd64
(which will remove
.BR grub\-pc ),
run
.BR grub\-install (8)
on the boot disk, and run
.BR update\-grub (8).
.TP
.B Set GRUB_ENABLE_CRYPTODISK
If
.B grub\-efi\-amd64
is installed but
.B GRUB_ENABLE_CRYPTODISK
is not set, offers to add or uncomment the line in
.I /etc/default/grub
and run
.BR update\-grub (8).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/efi-measured-boot/config
Runtime configuration (read if present).
.TP
.I /etc/default/grub
Checked and optionally modified for
.BR GRUB_ENABLE_CRYPTODISK .
.TP
.I /sys/firmware/efi
Checked for UEFI mode detection.
.TP
.I /boot/efi
Expected ESP mount point.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
No blocking issues found.  The system is ready for
.BR emboot\-setup (8).
.TP
.B 1
One or more blocking issues were found.  The summary printed to standard
error lists each issue.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR emboot\-setup (8),
.BR update\-emboot (8),
.BR cryptsetup (8),
.BR grub\-install (8),
.BR update\-grub (8),
.BR tpm2_pcrread (1),
.BR efibootmgr (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Kyle R. Rose
