.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Kyle R. Rose
.TH EMBOOT\-SETUP 8 "2026-06-18" "efi-measured-boot" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
emboot\-setup \- first-time setup for efi-measured-boot
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B emboot\-setup
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B emboot\-setup
performs the one-time system changes required to activate the
.B efi-measured-boot
boot chain.  It is interactive: it prints progress to standard error and
prompts before taking any breaking action.
.PP
Run
.BR emboot\-prepare (8)
first to verify that all prerequisites are met.  Edit
.I /etc/efi-measured-boot/config
before running
.B emboot\-setup
if the defaults need adjustment (ESP mount point, OS name, PCR selection, etc.).
.PP
Must be run as root (e.g. via
.BR sudo ).
.PP
On successful completion,
.B emboot\-setup
instructs the system to boot the emboot EFI loader on the next boot.  The
first boot triggers
.BR emboot\-firstboot.service ,
which seals the LUKS passphrase to the TPM.  Subsequent kernel installs and
removals are handled automatically by the kernel and initramfs hooks.
.SH STEPS
.B emboot\-setup
performs the following steps in order.
.TP
.B Pre-flight checks
Verifies the requirements that
.BR emboot\-setup
is about to rely on:
root privileges, x86_64 architecture, EFI mode, ESP mounted as vfat at
.IR /boot/efi ,
ESP at least 500\ MiB, root on LUKS2 with a PBKDF2 keyslot, and TPM 2.0
accessible.  Aborts if any check fails.
.TP
.B Legacy removal (interactive)
If a previous manual (non-packaged) installation is found under
.I /usr/local
.RB ( /usr/local/sbin/update\-emboot
or
.IR /usr/local/share/efi-measured-boot ),
the user is offered the option to remove it.
.TP
.B Crypttab modification
Reads
.I /etc/crypttab
and adds the
.B keyscript=
option pointing to
.I /usr/share/efi-measured-boot/emboot_unseal.sh
on the entry for the root LUKS device.  Any pre-existing
.B keyscript=
option is replaced.  The original
.I /etc/crypttab
is preserved as
.I /etc/crypttab.pre_emboot
and restored on failure.
.TP
.B Monotonic counter provisioning
Creates a TPM2 NV monotonic counter at the NV index specified by
.B COUNTER_HANDLE
in the configuration (default
.BR 0x1926001 ).
The counter value is included in the TPM sealing policy; incrementing it
invalidates all sealed tokens, preventing downgrade attacks.
.TP
.B LUKS key generation
Generates a 128-byte random binary key and writes it to
.B $LUKS_KEY
(default
.IR /etc/keys/root-emboot.key )
with mode 0600, creating the parent directory if needed.  If the key file
already exists, it is reused.  The key is added to the root LUKS header
using
.BR cryptsetup\-luksAddKey (8)
with PBKDF2 KDF if it is not already present; the user is prompted for an
existing LUKS passphrase.
.TP
.B Firstboot service activation
Enables
.B emboot\-firstboot.service
and marks the system with a
.I pending-seal
sentinel so the service knows to perform sealing on the first emboot boot.
.TP
.B Initramfs rebuild
Runs
.B update\-initramfs\ \-u\ \-k\ all
to rebuild the initramfs with the emboot hooks included.  Sealing is
suppressed during this step (the
.B EMBOOT_KERNEL_HOOK_NO_SEAL
environment variable is set) because the EFI loaders are not yet in their
final state.
.TP
.B Next-boot EFI entry
Uses
.BR efibootmgr (8)
to set the emboot EFI entry as the one-time
.RB ( BootNext )
boot target.  The entry must already exist; if it does not,
.B emboot\-setup
exits with an error and instructs the user to create it first.
.SH FAILURE HANDLING
From the crypttab modification step onward,
.B emboot\-setup
registers an
.BR EXIT
trap.  If any step fails, the trap:
.IP \(bu 4
restores
.I /etc/crypttab
from
.IR /etc/crypttab.pre_emboot ,
.IP \(bu
removes
.IR /etc/efi-measured-boot/pending-seal ,
.IP \(bu
removes
.IR /etc/efi-measured-boot/configured .
.PP
This leaves the system in a safe state where the emboot hooks will not activate
(they check for
.IR /etc/efi-measured-boot/configured )
and the original crypttab is restored.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/efi-measured-boot/config
Runtime configuration.  Edit before running
.B emboot\-setup
to customise the ESP mount point, OS name, LUKS key path, sealed PCRs, and
similar settings.
.TP
.I /etc/efi-measured-boot/configured
Created early in the setup process to signal to the kernel and initramfs hooks
that setup has been committed.  Removed on failure.
.TP
.I /etc/efi-measured-boot/pending-seal
Sentinel consumed by
.B emboot\-firstboot.service
on the first emboot boot; triggers sealing.  Removed on failure.
.TP
.I /etc/crypttab
Modified to add the emboot keyscript.
.TP
.I /etc/crypttab.pre_emboot
Backup of
.I /etc/crypttab
taken before modification; restored on failure.
.TP
.I /etc/keys/root-emboot.key
Default path for the LUKS key file (controlled by
.B LUKS_KEY
in the configuration).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Setup completed successfully.  Reboot to activate the emboot boot chain.
.TP
.B 1
A pre-flight check failed or a setup step encountered an error.
The system is left in a safe, reverted state.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR emboot\-prepare (8),
.BR update\-emboot (8),
.BR cryptsetup (8),
.BR tpm2_tools (1),
.BR efibootmgr (8),
.BR update\-initramfs (8),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH AUTHORS
Kyle R. Rose
