.\" SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
.\" Copyright (c) 2026 Kyle R. Rose
.TH UPDATE\-EMBOOT 8 "2026-06-18" "efi-measured-boot" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
update\-emboot \- rebuild EFI loaders and reseal TPM tokens for efi-measured-boot
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B update\-emboot
[\fB\-r\fR | \fB\-s\fR | \fB\-S\fR]
[\fB\-i\fR]
[\fB\-k\fR \fIkernel\-release\fR]
[\fB\-v\fR [\fB\-v\fR ...]]
[\fB\-n\fR]
[\fB\-h\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B update\-emboot
is the main maintenance command for
.BR efi-measured-boot .
By default it rebuilds the EFI kernel blobs stored on the ESP, updates EFI
boot entries, and reseals the LUKS2 passphrase to the new PCR values predicted
by
.BR pcr-oracle .
.PP
The system maintains two EFI loader files on the ESP:
.TP
.I $EFI_MOUNT/EFI/$OS_SHORT_NAME/emboot.efi
The newest installed kernel.
.TP
.I $EFI_MOUNT/EFI/$OS_SHORT_NAME/emboot_old.efi
The second-newest installed kernel (kept for rollback).
.PP
Each loader is a PE binary built by embedding the kernel, initrd, and command
line into the systemd EFI stub via
.BR objcopy (1).
A corresponding sealed LUKS2 token is stored in the LUKS header; it holds the
LUKS passphrase sealed to a TPM policy (PCRs + a monotonic NV counter) that
will only unseal if the boot environment has not changed.
.PP
.B update\-emboot
is called automatically by the kernel hook in
.I /usr/share/kernel/postinst.d/
and
.IR /usr/share/kernel/postrm.d/ ,
and by the initramfs post-update hook in
.IR /etc/initramfs/post-update.d/ .
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Operations
Exactly one of the following may be specified; the default (no flag) updates
loaders and reseals.
.TP
.B \-r
Remove the LUKS token for the kernel release given by
.B \-k
(required).  Does not modify EFI loader files.  Used by the kernel postrm hook
after a kernel is removed.
.TP
.B \-s
Reseal tokens only: predict new PCR values and update sealed LUKS tokens for
all loaders, but do not rebuild or replace the EFI loader files.
.TP
.B \-S
Update loaders only: rebuild EFI blobs and update boot entries, but do not
create or update any sealed LUKS tokens.
.SS Modifiers
.TP
.BI \-k " kernel\-release"
Restrict the operation to the specified kernel release (e.g.\&
.IR 6.1.0\-26\-amd64 ).
Without this flag, all installed kernels are considered.
.TP
.B \-i
Increment the monotonic TPM NV counter before sealing.  This invalidates all
previously sealed tokens.  Typically used after removing a kernel (the kernel
postrm hook calls this automatically).  Incompatible with
.BR \-k .
.SS Verbosity
.TP
.B \-v
Increase verbosity.  May be repeated: one
.B \-v
enables informational messages; two enable debug output; three enable
detailed debug output.  The environment variable
.B EMBOOT_VERBOSE
also controls this (0=normal, 3=info, 4=debug, 5=detail).
.SS Other
.TP
.B \-n
Dry run.  Print the commands that would be executed without running them.
.TP
.B \-h
Print a short usage summary and exit.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/efi-measured-boot/config
Runtime configuration file.  Read on every invocation.  See
.BR efi\-measured\-boot (7)
for a description of each variable.
.TP
.I /etc/efi-measured-boot/configured
Sentinel file created by
.BR emboot\-setup (8)
when the system is first committed to the emboot boot chain.  Kernel and
initramfs hooks exit immediately if this file is absent.
.TP
.I $EFI_MOUNT/EFI/$OS_SHORT_NAME/emboot.efi
Current-kernel EFI loader blob.
.TP
.I $EFI_MOUNT/EFI/$OS_SHORT_NAME/emboot_old.efi
Previous-kernel EFI loader blob.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
An error occurred.  Diagnostic messages are printed to standard error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR emboot\-setup (8),
.BR emboot\-prepare (8),
.BR cryptsetup (8),
.BR tpm2_tools (1),
.BR efibootmgr (8)
.SH AUTHORS
Kyle R. Rose
